You can be general. I'm going to give a name because
I'm proud of this young man. We had a player named
Lester Hayes. Oh, of course. And you probably
remember Lester Hayes. Yes, I do. One of the things
that was unique about him was he was a defensive
back, and he discovered that the more stick them he
put on his hands, the more balls he intercepted.
And by the time he got into the pros, he would
actually have grease all over his hands, and they
finally patched the Lester Hayes rule that
prevented that. But Lester had a speech
impediment. You remember that, I'm sure. And a
basketball player named Randy Knowles, who was a
real good shooter, was in my class. And I'm
blocking the tackle right now. There was a
defensive tackle in that class, a big guy. He was
also black. Of course, Randy Knowles was a white
guy, and Lester was black, and so was this fella.
And they were a lot of fun. They kept the class
moving, but I could tell they often were not
prepared for class. And I worried about Lester,
whether or not he was going to be able to survive in
this environment or not, until after class one
day, he and this defensive tackle were having a
discussion. And it was an informal discussion
about defensive football. And Lester outlined
one of the most succinct explanations of
defensive system I'd ever seen. And he stumbled
and stuttered and did it, but it was really
intricate. And I thought, this guy is not a dumb
guy. He might have some disadvantages, but he's
not dumb. Later on, as he was drafted in the pros, he
was, after one of his really good games, they
interviewed him on TV. I saw the interview, in
fact. And, of course, he was excited. He had won the
game, and he was nervous, and he could not make a
sentence. He didn't get three words together. He
saw that in a rerun and was so embarrassed by it
until he went to school then and got some help and
learned to combat that speech impediment. And the
last time I heard him, he was Very controlled kind
of conversation. I don't know when I've ever been
more proud of a young man. All right, now, I'm
trying, my brain is trying to recall, there was
somebody else, some other athlete's wife, who was
trained in speech therapy. I think maybe you're
right. Who helped him some. Yeah. I think maybe
you're right about that. I didn't know where he
went for his help. Because there was a at one point
there was a worry as to whether Lester could pass
everything here and his lack of confidence and so
forth. Did anybody ever twist your arm about a
grade for an athlete?
Never did. I don't think I ever recall any. But I
made I made it clear very early on. I had been a
coach, and I knew what coaches did. And I made it
very clear that I was going to do two things, that
they were going to be treated fairly in my class.
When I was in college, I can remember going to a
chemistry class one morning. And this happened
pretty often. And the instructor said, how many
basketball players are here? And you raise your
hand, and he'd say, you might as well drop this
class. You cannot make it in here. You're going to
miss some classes, and you can't make it. And it got
to the point where you were afraid to answer that
question. Because other classes, they'd say, how
many basketball players are here? And you raise
your hand, I like basketball. I'm glad you're
here. And you got to where you were gun shy about
whether to raise your hand or not raise your hand.
And so one of the first things I'd tell my athletes
was, you're going to be treated fairly in this
class. And I know you represent the university.
You're going to miss some classes. And you'll be
allowed to make up everything that can be made up.
But I'm not going to keep you eligible. You're
going to have to do that on your own. And I did that
early on. And so I never had a lot of problems. But
the one time I think I was going to be approached was
when Coach Sherrill was here. I was department
head then. And he called me over to Kane Hall for
lunch. And I'm not sure yet what the purpose of that
meeting was. It might have been just to get to know
them. Because we have always had a good
relationship with athletics, unlike a lot of
schools where health and physical education
athletics were at war with one another. We never
had that kind of relationship here. But Coach
Cheryl had me over to lunch at Kane Hall. and we
visited and talked and a lot of people came by the
table and when we got through I could tell he was
about to say something and before he opened his
mouth I said coach I want to tell you how much we how
pleased we are that you're here and I want to tell
you that we've always had a real good relationship
with between our two departments and and I sure
hope we can can maintain that but but there's
there's a couple things you need to know number one
And I went through the same spiel about how we
treated athletes in our department. And I said,
you can count on that. If they have to miss, we'll
help them make it up. We're not going to keep them
eligible. And the second thing is, I won't be a
dumping ground for your worn-out coaches. If you
don't want them, I don't want them. And he kind of
cleared his throat and said, there's no shortcuts
in this business. And that's the only comment that
he made. And consequently, we got along very well.
But I have to say, I never was approached. Were you
ever approached as a faculty member? No, no, I
never was. I never was. Occasionally, and I knew a
good many coaches personally, occasionally a
coach would see me in the hallway and say, hey,
how's so-and-so doing? But I never had any arm
twisted or anything. I never did. When Ballard was
here, I was one of the people that he called on when
it was still legal to do so. When he'd have athletes
here for the weekend, I'd go over on Saturdays and
talk to them about the institution actually and so
forth. I remember talking to Bubba Bean. Describe
the relationship between the Department of
Athletics and the Department of, and did the name
change of your department in the 70s or early 80s?
Yeah, it changed in the 80s, somewhere around 83,
84. And what was the name change? It was changed
from health and physical education to health and
kinesiology. And it actually really reflects
what's going on in what was then physical
education better. We made the change ourselves,
but it was not without motivation. We had wanted to
change it for some time. In fact, the field, the
discipline felt the need to change. But there
wasn't We couldn't get an agreement as to what we
wanted to be. We couldn't even get an agreement
within our own department. But what happened was
that there was a guy from Delmont, and I'm
forgetting his name. I thought I never would
forget it. He was chairman of education for the
legislature, chairman of the education
committee. And he got the legislature to pass a
law. And you may have been at UTEP at that time. I
can't remember exactly. But the law was that you
could have no more than six hours of education in
your curriculum. And that put And the way they
interpreted that law was that any word, anytime
you had the word education, that meant that was an
education course. So music education was an
education course. Health education was an
education course. Physical education was an
education course. So we were forced to change. And
of course we made the case that not all of our
courses were education. Some of them were
discipline specific, others were methodology,
and those were education. So it was easy to get
consensus because we knew that our future
depended on it. But in making that change, it
better reflects what's going on in physical
education. The old physical education programs
is only a very small part of what is done over there
now. Exercise physiology, motor learning,
biomechanics, those are the big things now. And I
regret that some. But the relationship of our
department to athletics has always been a very
good one. Carl Landis, I think he did, he started
that. I don't know if he started it or not, but he
certainly kept it going. Of course, Walter
Penberthy came here as intramural director, and
he was hired by the Department of Athletics to run
the intramural program and later to become
department head. So there was always that
relationship. And if you go back far enough, most
of the coaches were faculty members in physical
education. So when Carl came along, he did nothing
to hurt that. In fact, enhanced it. And I hope I did
the same thing. There were a lot of good that came
out of that. Number one, we weren't throwing rocks
at each other and constantly doing damage to
people that didn't deserve it. Secondly, we got
some nice things out of it. For example, they
wanted, Emory Ballard wanted to expand the
football stadium. But if you build that football
stadium, you have to have something to hold it up.
And he didn't quite have enough money to, you know
this story better than I do, he didn't have enough
money to build the stadium, so they wanted to tap
the permanent university fund. But you couldn't
use a permanent university fund for athletics.
So, hence, we got a brand new building, a health and
physical education, a much needed building, I
might add, and doubled our square footage.
Describe those facilities. Oh, at the time, they
were state of the art. We've kind of been passed
now, but... There was new administrative offices
on the first floor, which were superb, complete
with conference rooms and faculty offices,
classrooms, which have been recently upgraded,
by the way, in their state of the art. Now the
classrooms are. On the second floor were our labs,
human performance labs, dance studios, and those
kinds of things. Fourth floor was gymnasiums, and
the last floor was gymnasium. We went from a from a
situation where everybody was doubled up and
sometimes tripled up in offices so that we all had
private offices. And we never would have gotten
that. Well, it would have been very difficult to
have gotten that, apart from athletics. They were
the point people on that. Then Jackie Sherrill
came along and wanted a state-of-the-art weight
room, a conditioning room. And so he built the
STEED. What does he call that? Strength and
Conditioning Laboratory. which is really an
exercise room. But once again, he didn't have
quite enough money to build the whole building. So
he agreed that a third of the building could belong
to our department. And in return, they got to use
some permanent university money for that. And we
built the human performance laboratory over
there, which is, I'm probably sitting in this
chair because that lab is over there. Because one
of the things they do over there is stress testing
with physician supervision and monitoring the
heart at the same time. And that's how they found my
heart condition. I didn't know I was even a
problem. And consequently, they caught it,
corrected it, or at least treated it. And I was a
walking time bomb. I was 90% occluded and didn't
know it. So some nice things have occurred as a
result of that relationship. Now we've taken some
hits because of it, too. Being that closely
related, there are a lot in the academic community
who will equate us with them. And it's been a
constant battle to remind everyone that we're an
academic program. And sometimes it's hurt us. On
the whole, I wouldn't, you know, the good has been
better than the bad, I think. I'm not going to ask
the negative. Of all the coaches and athletic
department personnel you all have worked with, to
which ones would you give the highest grades? Who
was the most positive and helpful? Oh, Wally Groff
is outstanding. He really is good. I understand
that former students are burning him a little bit
now, and primarily it's because of him. the one
loss records, overall one loss records. But
anyone who knows Wiley knows he's first class. We
didn't really have a bad situation. Of course, I
didn't go back as far as Barry Bryant, so I don't
know that story. But
I don't recall a bad situation, even when Coach
Sherrill was here. And, of course, he pushed the
edge of the envelope a lot of the time. I still had no
relationship problem with him. But Wally is by far
the best we've had.
In the late 70s and 80s, what were some of the
stepping stones that caused you and your
colleagues to know that things were moving
forward? Well, I took the liberty of writing down
some things, mainly because you warned me that you
might ask me that question. I
think in the time I was here, the College of
Education had just been created about two years
before my arrival. It had come out of science, and
they lumped ADCI and Ag Ed and us and some others
together. And that was an important move, I think,
for allowing us to develop the way we should have.
But in 1973, we got our undergraduate curriculum
in health education approved, which allowed us to
have those individuals who wanted to go into
school health could major in health education,
and those who wanted to work in in public health and
places like that could major in community health.
So it did two things. It opened up the health
curriculum, but it also, for the first time, made
it possible to, in our department, to get a degree
without being teacher certified. You could do
something a little different.
In 1974,
we developed a cardiac rehab program. Dr. George
Jessup was the person who primarily did that along
with Baylor College of Medicine and we began to
develop majors who could actually work in cardiac
rehab facilities and we helped with the
development of the Methodist Hospitals program
in cardiac rehab. Prior to that, the allied health
program that we've talked about before in here
that we have. It was a consortium between us and
Baylor College of Medicine and the University of
Houston. And to some degree, that relationship
that was established with Baylor and us helped, I
think, with the relationship that later was
established for the med school. But I wouldn't I
can't take much credit for that, but the
discussion that went on at the upper
administration level opened that door, I think.
Then Carl Landis had already established a lot of
our laboratories, but in moving to our new
building, we were able to build the mechanical
analysis lab, the human performance lab, the
motor performance lab. And for the first time we
were doing research that was legitimate research
that could hold us on with any in the, not any in the
university, but most in the university.
Then in the fall of 74, it was kind of a benchmark
happening for the activity program. There was an
attack on the program. There were some on campus
that wanted to do away with that program, and there
always was some. But as a result of that attack, the
program actually got strengthened. For the first
time, at least since I've been here, they began to
give college credit for those courses. Prior to
that time, you'll recall, it was possible to have
better than a four-point average because you got
those added on. This changed the way they operated
there. And I think it gave us a little more respect
for the program.
Then a major thing happened was
with the Project 2000. Is that what they called
that then? The Board of Regents Initiative,
Project 2000, changed our perspective made us
look at graduate programs a lot more than we had
before. And that affected everybody in the
university and certainly affected us.
In 1973, they also added an expansion to G. Raleigh
White. And for the first time, there was women's
locker rooms. There had never been women's locker
rooms prior to that. They were dressed in a little
closet area. And women's bathrooms. And there
were some other facilities added. And that
changed the complexion of the university. And
about that time was when we began to see a lot more
women show up on campus. And I can remember walking
down the hall in G. Raleigh one morning going to
class, and two guys were in front of me. And one of
them said to the other one that said, you know, when
I came here, I didn't see one pretty girl in a month.
Now I see one everywhere I look. And the first time I
thought of it, the scenery was changing
considerably on campus.
Then in 1980, we opened what was then called East
Cal. It later became known as the Reed Building,
which is the building we're in now. And that was a
biggie. That really made a difference. Carl
Landis did most of the of the work on that building.
I got the credit for it because it opened under my
administration, but he really did the work there.
In 1980,
we were introduced to a guy named Tom Reed, and that
was a really big thing for the department, I think.
Is it okay to talk a little bit about that? Oh,
please do. And tell us about his background. That
story is, I think, kind of an unusual one. Tom Reed
grew up in Lakeland or Lakeview, and I'm sorry I
don't know the Ohio. It's an outskirt of
Cleveland. He
grew up during the 40s and so he was drafted into or
joined the Army Air Force. And he flew transport
airplanes. He flew the Burma Hump. That was one of
his major assignments. And upon getting out of the
service, He took the GI Bill and went to college. He
went to a school called Kinney College, Kinney
College in Ohio. Small liberal arts school. Paul
Newman was in that school. And Jonathan, Jonathan
who, the comedian, Jonathan. Waters? No. No, no,
no. Winters, Winters. Winters. Jonathan
Winters, yeah. They were both in his class. And it
wasn't about 500 students in the whole school, I
think. Well, while he was in school there, he
opened the first bookstore they'd ever had in that
school, you know, where they sold peanuts and
popcorns and paper and that kind of thing. He said
he made so much money until he decided he needed
college, so he dropped out of school. Dropped out
and almost immediately the store went belly up.
But he never did finish school. He kind of diddled
back and forth. And so while looking for a job, a
friend of his was working for a guy named Fred
Lennon, who manufactured pipe fittings and
talked Tom into working for him. Now, that itself
is kind of a unique story. All this fished together
down the road a piece. Fred Lennon was... was a
marketing person. That was his specialty. And
there was another man named Crawford who was an
engineer. Crawford manufactured or invented
this pipe fitting, a unique way of fitting pipes
together. It's called Swaglock is the brand name
now. And he wanted to market it, but he didn't know
how, so he partnered with Fred Lennon, and they
marketed it and did pretty well. Well, Lennon,
being a businessman, wanted to go into Cleveland,
build a foundry, and actually do this big time,
which would incur a lot of debt. And Crawford,
being an academician, didn't want to do that, so he
sold out to Lennon for something under $20,000,
according to Tom Reed. Well, Lennon went into
Cleveland, built his foundry, and the short of it
is he's now the largest manufacturer of pipe
fittings in the entire world, worth billions of
dollars. Tom went to work for him and they sent him
to Houston. He said he was just a peddler. He said, I
had my inventory in the trunk of the car and kept my
books in the front seat. My territory was Texas,
Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arkansas, Louisiana. He
had a huge territory. which he quickly narrowed
down. And he became very successful. A couple of
things happened to him. One, he developed a unique
way of marketing in that he identified vice
presidents. He called them vice presidents. And
he set each of those people up in a warehouse. And he
liked athletes an awful lot because he liked the
competitiveness of their nature. And he had five
of those guys eventually. Each one of them had
their own store. And he took a piece of the action
out of each store. But the understanding was that
when he retired, he would give them their store. He
would set them up in business, in effect. They just
had to wait for deferred gratification. And that
was successful. But being in the pipe business, he
also was close to the oil business. And so he got in
on the bottom floor of the Midland Odessa oil field
and invested in a few of those wells and never had a
dry hole. He had five or six wells that came in. And
consequently, he became very wealthy. Now here's
where the story begins to tie together. He said
that when he was a youngster, he played baseball.
And in the summertime, he'd look around and all of
his friends would be gone. And he discovered that
they were off in summer camp. His parents, though,
weren't poor, but they didn't feel like it was in
the middle of the Depression or end of the
Depression. He didn't feel like that they could
send him to camp. So he made himself a promise that
when he got rich, he was going to build a camp for
kids who couldn't go to camp, like we all play those
kind of games. Well, when he became very
successful, he remembered that promise, and he
wanted to do something good, and so he decided to
build a camp. And he went out to San Diego out in the
desert area, bought some property, was going to
build his camp out there. For some reason he
discovered that he didn't, that was not a good
deal. One thing is he liked to be a hands-on type
person and Houston was a long way from San Diego. So
he decided not to build a camp, but he held the
property for a while and sold it and made an obscene
profit off of it because San Diego was moving out in
that direction. So then he bought some property in
Kerrville and decided that he would build a camp
there. And he actually started construction. But
he went over there one day, and his builder, who was
a sheriff of the county, had more of his building
materials on the sheriff's home than he did out in
the property. So he got discouraged and said,
well, maybe the good Lord just doesn't want me to
build this camp. But he held on the land a while and
sold it. And he said again, the profit was so great.
He said it was tremendous what he made off that
profit. And he said, well, maybe the Lord does want
me to do this. So finally he found this place down in
Magnolia. And it was about 35 acres. It had a small
cabin on it. And that's where he began to clear off
the land and build some cabins. And the first I knew
anything about it, Bob Rutledge, do you recall
him, called me one day and said, I was department
head, and said, Len, how would you like to have
$100,000 in scholarships? I said, well, I'd like
to have $100,000 in scholarships. I said, well, I
got a guy down in Houston that's going to give you
some. I said, but he wants to talk to you. He's going
to give you the money no matter what, but I want you
to go down and listen to him. And so I discovered
that what he was looking for was someone to run the
camp for him. He'd had some bad experiences. He
first tried to get a an employee to run it, and that
just didn't work out very well for him. So I went
down there expecting to see some pup tents by a
creek. And what I saw was about a million dollar
plant. It was really, really well underway then.
And it didn't take long to figure out that'd be a
good thing for us to get involved in. And so we took
one of our lecturers who taught in the activity
program who didn't have summer employment and
made him the director. We took some of our majors
and made them the counselors. And we went down to
run the camp. And it happened that this fellow, his
name was Bob Pankey, was the lecturer that I'd
chosen. P-A-N-K-E-Y. And he had worked in I
think a Bob White. What's Bob White's dad's name
that worked here? You're talking about Camp...
Camp Kanekut. Kanekut, up in Missouri. Right, and
I can't think of his dad's name now, but you know who
I'm talking about. I want to say Jojo, and that's
not quite right. Yeah, Jojo's his son, and Joe and
Bob, and his dad's name is... We'll think of it
later. Of course, the Penberths were close to
them. Well, Bob Pankey had worked at Camp Kanekut
and knew a little bit about that, and so he
developed his program, and And I would go down two
or three times and look at it. And at the end of the
summer, Tom called me in and said, this is the best
I've ever had this camp run. I want to keep this
going. And here's another check for $100,000. And
so we were encouraged by that. and found out that
the counselors were really getting good
experiences because they were working with
youngsters that they were going to be working
with. So we went back the next year and ran the camp
again. At the end of that year, he gave us a check for
$250,000. And so he's been very generous with us
along the way. And then not a few years ago, about
eight or ten years ago, his health started
deteriorating. And being a person that wanted
hands-on type operation, he wanted someone down
at the camp And he asked me one day if I thought that
if he gave a chair to the university, would that
lock us into that camp? And of course, we assured
him that it would. And so he gave us a $500,000
matched chair. And then later, I was named to that
chair, which was undeservedly so. But
nevertheless, it worked out good. And that's
about the time I decided to step down as department
head. So in the summer, I worked down there. I'm
back and forth between there and the university.
And his name? His name is Tom Reed, R-E-A-D.
What's good about that was he continued to give us
discretionary money in the denominator, about
$25,000 a year. And he's done that for, or did that
until his death, and his widow has continued now,
and it's been about 10 or 15 years that he's done
that kind of thing. That's been a big deal for us.
And consequently, we named our building the Reed
Building because of that. He died about nine years
ago. And his widow has continued to be very
generous with him. I think that relationship was
an important one because we have been able to do
some things that we wouldn't have been able to do
without those funds.
Prior to that, the Omar Smith chair had come our
way. And that also was a big thing. You remember
Omar was a tennis coach here. And Bob Walker helped
us get that chair. It was given to us as stock in the
Deer Queens. and wasn't funded until about five or
six years ago. But that was a benchmark for us.
Then we developed an outdoor education
institute. Mickey Little did that while she was
here. And another benchmark was the emergency
medical care program that Laura Kitzmiller put
together. Laura was really the main person and the
only person that ran that program for a good long
time. And that's been a major, major benchmark.
The other important thing we did along the way was
the recruiting of minorities. Just in a quick and
dirty way, those are the highlights that I would I
would put together. How did you recruit those
minorities? Well, we finally decided that they
weren't going to come to us. We just had to go find
them. And so we called some people that we knew that
had minorities in their undergraduate programs.
What kind of folks? Well, at Northwestern was our
colleagues over there in health and physical
education. We knew that they had Northwest
Louisiana. And there was a guy named Frank Ashley
who They had recently graduated, and he had gone to
Alabama for his doctorate and was finishing. And
so we were able to look him up and bring him on. And of
course, Frank is now the director of admissions at
A&M. And he really helped us bring others in when
you just get that first one. We had another kid
named Butler that came in as a lecturer and then got
his doctorate while he was here. But we still
aren't very good at it. We have a good mix of men and
women, but a minority is still, it's a hard fight.
Let's go back. Carl Landis served as department
head until when? Until 1979. And I don't remember
what year he started. Did you succeed him? I
succeeded him. Describe how that came about. What
was the process and how were you identified and so
forth? I don't know that I was ready for that job,
and I'm sure they weren't thinking about me. Linus
Dow was the heir apparent.